In the summer of 1948, the Soviets blocked all land and water routes to West Berlin.
The Western Allies’ response was to bring supplies to the city by air.
The Berlin Airlift lasted from 24th June 1948 until 12th May 1949.
Horst Bert Molkenbuhr spent five years in a Nazi re-education camp as a child
because his family was close to the left-wing Social Democratic Party. He tells us a story that is rarely mentioned in the usual reports about the airlift.
In 1949, thousands of teenagers spent their summer holidays on Tempelhof Field assisting the Allies.
He was one of them.
The atmosphere was very strange at first.
After all, the pilots were the same men
who had bombed our cities.
The thing was that the Americans were incredibly afraid of German men.
They thought if they had given them a tin of vegetables
they would have built a machine gun out of it.
That’s why no German men were allowed into Tempelhof Airport.
Each regiment in Berlin was tasked
with founding a youth club.
One fine day
they asked us if we would be willing
to unload coal...
We all stood up as one.
Around 900 to 1000 young people
from the 21 clubs.
We were on duty for 24 hours
and got one meal,
just like the one the Air Force got.
Of course that was sensational for our families,
having one less mouth to feed.
We were starving at the time.
It was a big metal bowl with five indentations:
For soup,
potatoes, meat,
custard.
Everything was in there.
Everybody got to eat their fill.
If necessary you got seconds.
That was a dream come true.
Everything was just about survival back then.
My mother...
My father died in Russia.
My mother had three children
and her mother to look after...
She didn’t earn enough for us to be able to buy the food we needed.
That’s why we appreciate how good we have it today...
apart from our health.
That’s where the bags were.
They were lifted out,
then brought to the door here
and thrown out of the door.
The truck almost reached the lower edge.
And on the truck there were always six to eight boys.
They took the bags
and packed them towards the front
until the plane was empty.
It seemed like a miracle to us
that there were not more accidents.
The way they were flying here
and the way they were landing and taking off...
It was incredible.
They were handling their machines so well:
The plane came to a halt, the hatch opened, the guy fell down
and was already asleep.
The Americans were so free and casual,
that was something we admired.
We were still used to
someone bellowing orders at us.
At school the teachers would still beat us.
Reports about the airlift
never talk about the fact
that we unloaded the planes
in the first couple of months.
I have never understood why we were never mentioned.